The Great Chinese Famine of 1959-1961, also known as the Three-Year Famine, was the largest famine in human history. This famine claimed millions of lives; historians estimate that the famine caused approximately 30 million deaths. Despite its inordinate significance in Chinese history, the topic has remained relatively taboo and as such little academic study has been conducted to determine the basis of the famine, which would be necessary for prevention of a similar situation in the future.
	This investigation seeks to analyze the many sources of the famine to determine the principal cause. A wide variety of factors are considered, which are divided into four categories: natural causes, political conflicts, economic failures, and psychosocial influences. Political and social events are taken from a diverse range of sources, which range from testimonials of those who have suffered in the famine to the opinions of experienced historians who have devoted their careers to studying Maoism or the Great Leap Forward. In any case, multiple sources, both primary and secondary, are chosen so that they present a wide variety of views and opinions of the outcome and the causes of the Great Chinese Famine of 1959-1961. Only those events between the declaration of the People's Republic of China (October 1, 1949) and the end of the Great Chinese Famine (1961) will be considered in this investigation. This study does not concern itself with investigating the factors affecting the length of the famine, which would be out of scope of the investigation.
	This investigation concludes that, although there were many contributory factors at play, the Great Chinese Famine was principally caused by the social environment brought about by Mao's policies and activities. Events such as the Hundred Flowers Campaign and the Anti-Rightist Campaign created a social environment which disallowed for critical thought and dialectic. In addition, this environment made reporting problems impossible, so Mao could not address these problems which would lead to a disastrous famine. By not being able to address these fundamental problems, Mao's regime created a famine the world would never be able to forget.



















Introduction
	The People's Republic of China (PRC) was declared on October 1, 1949 by the Communist Party of China (CPC), under the direction of Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung). It was established to supplant the existing nationalist Kuomintang (KMT) government under the direction of Chiang Kai-shek. The CPC succeeded because it proposed an egalitarian society, which gave basic freedoms the KMT did not offer, such as freedom of thought, speech, publication, and assembly, among others. As the rise of the CPC coincided with the fall of the Soviet Union under Josef Stalin, Mao believed that he could build a society that avoided the mistakes of the Soviet Union and could more effectively achieve its goals of industrial and agricultural growth. Moreover, Mao believed that, with his form of socialism, China could "overtake England [in agricultural and industrial output] and catch up with America" in a very short time period (Zheng family, quoted in China - A Century of Revolution 40:11).
	To achieve these impressive goals, Mao began a gradual transformation of China in agricultural and industrial production. Namely, Mao commenced the Great Leap Forward (GLF) during the years of 1958-1961. With the GLF, the CPC achieved a rapid transformation of China by first pooling property into so-called "cooperatives", where multiple families managed the same plot of land, and ultimately into "communes", where private property was outlawed and where multiple towns shared the same land (Spence 579). The most disastrous facet of the GLF, however, came out of the desire for heightened industrial output. China was to implement "backyard furnaces" in its various communes, to produce a greater level of steel for its industrial development. Although the raw production (in tons) did increase, it was at the expense of the quality and it was in no way sustainable. Entire forests were destroyed to provide fuel for the furnaces, and anything made from iron or steel was burned, ranging from pots and bed frames to tools (China - A Century of Revolution 40:25). When it became apparent that the industrial output was unsustainable, Mao saw the limiting factor of the productivity to be a limited workforce. In consequence, he ordered that thousands of agricultural workers move to industry. Shortly after the commencement of the GLF, the largest famine in human history ensued, taking an estimated 30 million lives. Conditions were horrendous; Peng Dehuai, the Chinese Minister of Defense during the GLF, wrote "Grain scattered across the ground, potato leaves withered, strong young people have gone to make steel, only children and old women reap the crops. How will they eat next year? Please, think of the people" (China - A Century of Revolution 56:07). Peng's words only begin to describe the horrors seen during the Great Chinese Famine of 1959-1961.
	Although the Chinese government officially blamed the famine on the droughts and floods that were seen during 1959-61, it is clear that there are many political and social factors at play. This investigation seeks to analyze the causes of the Great Chinese Famine to determine the source principally responsible. This topic is worthy of study because it has impacted so many lives and changed the course of Chinese history forever. Even with its extraordinary significance, it is still a taboo topic in China even today. However, the fact that it is not a well-studied topic underscores the necessity of investigation, so as to prevent a similar situation from happening in the future. Personally, this investigation is significant to me because I have many friends from China whose families have been permanently affected by this tragedy, and also because, in my travels, I have experienced the poverty of the Chinese countryside which still exists from the remnants of these events. This investigation is separated into two sections, one for analysis of the causes of the famine, and one for comparing and contrasting historical schools of thought. The former section is subdivided into four main topics: investigating the social, political, economic, and environmental factors which contributed to the famine. Throughout the paper, two major historiographical schools of thought are considered: the orthodoxy, which argues that Mao's actions directly caused the famine, or the revisionist school of thought, which argues that the political and economic situation in China would have brought about the famine, regardless of Mao's actions. This investigation proposes that the principal cause of the Great Chinese Famine is not inherent in the goals of the GLF or in the direct actions of Mao, but rather the complex social atmosphere created in the PRC which disallowed for critical thought and dialectic, one which did not value intelligence, but rather, submission to Maoist dogma.
















Body - Analysis of the Causes of the Great Chinese Famine
Section A. Environmental Problems
	To begin, the years of 1959 to 1961 did see particularly bad flooding and drought, that gave the CCP some scapegoat for the horrendous famine that would occur in these years; thus, the Chinese government officially blamed the environmental conditions of China for the famine (China - A Century of Revolution 57:53). Indeed, the famine was originally referred to as the "Three Year Natural Disaster" (China - A Century of Revolution 53:23). Several factors contributed to these poor environmental conditions. First, an estimated 60 percent of agricultural land received no rain at all in 1960 (Liu 1). Undoubtedly, this significantly reduced the possible production of crops in that year, which was exacerbated by the flooding of the Yellow River in July 1959; this flooding, however, is estimated to have only taken two million lives, but it is likely that there were other adverse agricultural effects.
	Another factor to consider is the climate changes brought about by the deforestation during the Great Leap Forward. Many of China's forests "were cut down to provide fuel for the backyard furnaces" in the thousands of communes (Mimmack 171). In consequence, many of the natural resources provided by these forests were not available, harming Chinese agriculture and possibly affecting the climate during the years of 1959-1961. However, the extent of the deforestation on the climate change is not clear.
	These conditions did exacerbate existing conditions, but the floods and draught were not the primary contributors to the famine. Famines and draughts were a major part of China's historical experience in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries; the shifting course of the Yellow river often claimed millions of lives (Pong 14). However, even in the worst conditions, these disasters could never approach the magnitude of lives taken in the Great Chinese Famine. With these factors in mind, it is clear that there are more significant contributory factors to the destructive power of the famine.
Section B. Political Problems
Subsection B1. China before the Great Leap Forward
	Understanding the context of the design of the Great Leap Forward is necessary to properly analyze its relation to the famine. After the proclamation of the CCP on October 1, 1949, and before the Great Leap Forward occurred, Mao implemented the First Five Year Plan. In this plan, Mao was to slowly assimilate the Chinese society to a socialist structure. Some scholars posit that, while the Soviet style of agriculture was "immensely destructive" in its rash actions, the economic policy of the CCP was shrewd; the CCP "…had from early on been a rural organization, and it knew how to take gradual steps toward its eventual goal" (Fairbank 282). 
Despite this, some contend that the First Five Year Plan reflected Mao's vision for an overly industrial economy, with "…58.2 percent of government investment [going] to industrial development, but only 7.6 percent [going] to agriculture" (Mimmack 163). Agriculture seems to have been tossed aside, undoubtedly leading to serious problems even before the Great Leap Forward was conceived.
	Famine was already present in China in the early- to mid-1950s, and some argue that the failure of Mao to recognize this warning sign majorly contributed to the famine (Dikötter 67). Many were dying of hunger even before the communes were introduced. Dikötter reports that Mao had received "numerous reports about hunger, disease and abuse from every corner of the country", in the form of "personal letters mailed by courageous individuals, unsolicited complaints from local cadres or investigations undertaken on his behalf by security personnel or private secretaries" (Dikötter 69). Hence, there is no doubt that Mao was adequately informed on the topic, but he, like many, were energized by the apparent successes of the plan (China - A Century of Revolution 49:16).
	Despite the apparent failure of the First Five Year Plan to diminish famine, Mao's leadership had some apparent successes. First, Mao's rapid reorganization of rural China into cooperative farms had been successful; by the end of 1957, "700,000 cooperative farms had been created, each of which contained up to 300 families" (Hsu, quoted in Spence 579). Agricultural figures for 1957, however were disappointing: "grain production increased only 1 percent over the year, in the face of 2 percent population rise" (Spence 574). What can account for this discrepancy? Although some argue that Mao's leadership skills were at fault of the failures of his Plans (including the famine), constituting the orthodoxy, the revisionist school of thought argues that Mao's political Plans were intrinsically flawed and would fail under any leader. This orthodox-revisionist debate is central to understanding the Great Chinese Famine.
Subsection B2. Sino-Soviet Relations
	One major tenet of the orthodox argument centers around Sino-Soviet relations. Mao launched the Great Leap Forward (GLF) to fulfill his "utopian vision of catching up to Great Britain and advanced industrialized countries in a few years" (Pong 18). The orthodoxy argues that Mao had several other motives which distracted him from facing the real problems his plans were facing. Primarily, these historians argue that Mao was involved in a "rivalry with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev for the leadership of the International Communist Movement" (Jisheng 89). Mao's greatest wish was indeed "to overtake the Soviet Union", in order for Mao "to take over actual leadership" (Jisheng 90). Evidence also suggests that Mao looked down on Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, supporting Mao's feelings of political superiority that, some argue, led to the ignorance of problems that led to the famine (Jisheng 90).
	Despite his rivalry with Soviet leadership, Mao paradoxically took great measures to build relations with the Soviet Union. First, he deliberately modeled the Great Leap Forward to resemble Stalin's Five Year Plans (Fairbank 299). In particular, Mao similarly divided the society into the "rulers and the ruled", and the CCP had "set up a Stalinist command economy they could really order the peasantry around" (Fairbank 297). However, many of those who subscribe to the revisionist school of thought argue that the Stalinist model would never work for China because the "Chinese population in 1950 was four times as big and their standard of living only half as high as that of the Russian population in the 1920s" (Fairbank 299). Hence, the reasoning for Mao's choice in designing the Great Leap Forward is unclear. Some argue that Mao was attempting to emphasize the non-Western nature of China in order to "overtake England and catch up with America", when his true competition was the Soviet Union (China - A Century of Revolution 40:11). Others argue that Mao was attempting to show that the failures of the Soviet Union under Stalin were not problems of the Five Year Plans, but problems of the leadership, attempting to showcase the successes of communism (Jisheng 89). In any case, revisionist argue that Mao's choice to emulate Soviet agriculture did play a major role in the famine.
	In addition, Mao strengthened China's relation with the Soviet Union and North Korea by sending the nations any excess grain produced in the GLF (Mimmack 172). The orthodox school of thought argues that Mao's decisions to do so were foolish and did not contribute to Mao's goals for the development of China, thus contributing majorly to the famine (Dikötter 67). These scholars point out that Mao had knowledge of the problems of hunger that China was facing, which he utterly ignored when he made the decision to export the grain, comprising a major economic failure (Dikötter 67). Although revisionists argued that Mao had limited knowledge of the extent of the famine, thus putting Mao to less blame, studies of official documents and interviews are finding that Mao indeed had much knowledge on the possible consequences of the export (Dikötter 69). In any case, his actions exacerbated the Great Chinese Famine.
Section C. Economic Problems
Subsection C1. Structural Problems in the Design of the Great Leap Forward
	Similar to the First Five Year Plan, the Great Leap Forward was primarily centered around increasing industrial output, rather than agricultural output (Mimmack 163). At first, the production level seemed to be increasing (largely out of competition for higher and higher reported statistics), so many enthusiastically continued their hard labor. However, the sheer amount of resources was decreasing. The effects of this discrepancy proved to be immensely destructive. Anything made of iron and steel was put into the furnaces: even "pots, bedframes, and tools" were used (China - A Century of Revolution 40:25). According to Mao's physician Li Zhisui, "every piece of iron and steel was taken from every family and made useless" (China - A Century of Revolution 42:22). The extent to which this contributed to the famine is not directly clear. Some point to the fact that many forests were cut down to provide fuel for the furnaces, and made some farming areas unusable (Mimmack 171). 
	Besides causing the destruction of many resources and tools, the heavy focus on industrial production had another disastrous effect. Although the agricultural and industrial figures for 1956 were positive, the figures for 1957 "were disappointing" (Spence 579). Mao sincerely believed  that the dip in production was caused by not enough manpower, so in response "many people [were] taken away from their fields to work in the communes or in factories, with terrible consequences for agriculture" (Mimmack 171). The massive exodus from the countryside caused problems for the cities, "which could not provide living for so major an influx of the rural population" (Dernberger 369). Hence, the orthodoxy finds that many of the hunger and population problems in China were intensified as a result of Mao's actions.
	In addition to the problems in steel production, Mao proposed unfeasible goals for the limited amount of workers available. The orthodoxy points out that Mao relied too strongly on the strength of the human will as a tool for productivity. It is true that Mao utilized mass mobilization of the Chinese people, and he did so through various techniques. In the transition of old peasant agriculture to the communes, Mao used proportional "semi-capitalist" returns which "kept the rich peasant community from fighting back," while keeping the motivation of self-interest as a driving force of productivity (Fairbank 282). He also created an environment of motivation in the communes, where the people believed that success is purely correlated to hard work. Wang Ruoshui, a CPC member, states, "we worked all day long… we were so enthusiastic" (China - A Century of Revolution 38:34). He goes on to quote the slogan, "catch the stars and moon", which reflects the "situations of mass hysteria" that Mao created. Both orthodox and revisionist scholars agree that people "worked around the clock and abandoned established ways, almost like anarchists seeking freedom from all constraints" (Fairbank 298). However, the efficacy of this aspect of Maoism is heatedly debated. It supports the revisionist argument, in that the direct problem causing the famine was not external factors such as the willingness of the people to contribute.
Subsection C2. Mass Decentralization
	The push for higher and higher agricultural yields necessitated the use of efficient production techniques. In particular, many were drawn to the idea of building "super-crops", based on the claims of Soviet scientist Trofim Lysenko (Mimmack 172). This school of thought, known as "Lysenkoism", is a major part of the revisionist argument and is relatively controversial. It involved the use of several methods, including "deep-plowing" and "close-planting". Deep-plowing "was a technique whereby a field is plowed into deep triangular trenches with the aim of creating more grain per square meter", and close-planting involved placing the plants in a closer proximity to each other to obtain a higher yield per unit area (Mimmack 172). According to Mao's physician Li Zhisui, though, "it was all just a show for Mao" (China - A Century of Revolution 1:51:36). In fact, these techniques often "exhausted the soil and produced lower crop yields" (Mimmack 172). 
	In addition, the organization of rural society into the communes brought communal dining halls. These halls were intended to be a more efficient way to allocate time and resources in the traditional task of preparing meals (Pong 18). Although it is debated, the revisionist consensus is that the communal dining halls played a major role in the famine, driving rural families to destitution (Jisheng 21). In addition to an "eat as much as you can" policy, there was "pilferage and leakage of supplies" (Pong 18). Revisionists argue that the mass decentralization of the Chinese economy led to a weakened control over the society, which, in combination with inexperienced local management, led to agricultural problems (Fairbank 300).
Section D. Psychosocial Factors and Intimidation Techniques
	Mao believed the success of China to be intrinsically connected to the unity of the people, rather than having limited resources or other factors. This led him to create a society based around fear of becoming a public enemy. This mood of fearfulness is hypothesized to be the primary cause of the Great Chinese Famine.
	Aside from the popular view of Mao being an "ideal, hard-working, incorruptible Asian",  his persona was surrounded by intimidation; the CCP conducted several campaigns that led to an environment where intellectuals were targeted and critical thought was discouraged (Feigon 5). The first of these events was the Hundred Flowers Campaign, enacted in 1956. During this period, the CCP openly encouraged its citizens to share their opinions of the government. Very soon after, "thousands of articles appeared criticizing all manner of CCP actions" (Mimmack 169). Rather than using the advice as constructive criticism, Mao took it as a personal, political attack. Shortly after, the Anti-Rightist campaign was launched, in which "hundreds of intellectuals were identified as 'rightists', who would go on to "[commit] suicide or [be] executed, and millions of people were sent into the countryside to 'learn' from the peasants or were sent to labor camps" (Mimmack 169). Thus, Mao showed that the opinion of intellectuals was not to be considered or even accepted in the society, creating a situation of mass hysteria and fear of political opposition (Chang, quoted in Mimmack 173). This fear of political opposition was a major factor in the famine because it prevented change in Mao's policies, where it could have prevented major aspects of the famine.
	Mao's views on intellectual opposition and political dialectic were made even more clear at the Lushan conference in 1958. Marshal Peng Dehuai, one of Mao's longest-standing supporters, spoke out about his policy on "rash advancement", trying to convince Mao to reverse his policy (Shelton 172). Mao interpreted his argument as "political treachery" and Peng was later later denounced and purged (China - A Century of Revolution 50:46). Mao made Peng into an example to showcase to the world that he would not take any political criticism.
	The orthodox school of thought argues that Mao was overly paranoid, and his paranoid nature made an enemy out of those who offered criticism to his actions. This in turn created a society where intellect was not valued and to speak out was a mistake. In consequence, the intellectuals were silenced, and the rest of the populace had essentially blind faith in Mao's decisions. The orthodoxy points out that Mao relied too strongly on the strength of the human will as a tool for productivity, by viewing anyone who opposed his rash advances as a "committee for hindering progress (Jisheng 93). Many local cadres were "under intense political pressure to fulfill an exceed production targets", often "reporting inflated harvest figures" (Pong 18). Zhang Langlang reports, "if one commune said they could turn out 150 tons an acre, another one would say their target is 180 tons. Each commune or school would promise a higher amount until the last school gave their highest figure" (China - A Century of Revolution 43:55). To make matters worse, the discrepancy between actual and reported figures was blamed on peasants, who were accused of "concealing or stealing food" and who were often eventually "tortured or killed" (Shelton 172). Hence, there was a great deal of corruption in the local authority which led to a silenced society. Attention to the problems in China, and also to the warning signs mentioned by Dikötter, was prevented by this social atmosphere constructed by Mao. While the revisionist argument does explain contributory factors toward the Great Chinese Famine, the famine itself could have been completely avoided if early action was taken to prevent exacerbation of the warning signs seen in the mid-1950s.
	Given all these factors, whether they be problems in the economic design, execution, or administration of the Great Leap Forward, the orthodox and revisionist schools of thought have great deals of evidence to back their claims. While it is true that the Great Leap Forward was an intrinsically flawed system, and may have not been appropriate for China at that time, there is no doubt that it was the social atmosphere created by Mao's actions that silenced intellectuals and essentially all critical thought that could have led to the prevention of the problems in the Great Leap Forward long before the famine occurred.


Conclusion
	To conclude, there is a wide body of evidence that has been presented in this investigation. The evidence is roughly divided into two categories: the revisionist school of thought which argues that the Great Leap Forward was intrinsically flawed as a system and thus created the problems that would lead to the famine, and the orthodox school of thought, which argues that Mao's actions were the primary cause of the failure of the Great Leap Forward and the principal cause of the Great Chinese Famine. Although there is a substantial wealth of evidence for both schools of thought, the primary contributing factor toward the Great Chinese Famine of 1959-61 was truly the social atmosphere of paranoia and Mao's political ignorance of the warning signs presented before and during the Great Leap Forward. Thus, this investigation finds the cause of the famine to be a synthesis of the orthodox and revisionist points of view; a post-revisionist viewpoint is adopted, with emphasis on the orthodox viewpoint. Although there are many factors which contributed to the famine, including Lysenkoism and natural causes, they were all able to be prevented with the proper attention. Mao's role within the Great Chinese Famine provides useful insight into the dangers of censorship and having leaders with boundless amounts of power.
