Development of Knowledge in Natural Science and Religious Knowledge Systems
	Although that which is accepted as knowledge today may be discarded tomorrow, the transient nature of knowledge systems is the fundamental quality of human understanding that enables our perception of the universe. Natural science and religion (as a subset of the area of knowledge of Ethics) are chosen to illustrate the ability to build knowledge. These areas of knowledge are explicitly chosen because of their stark differences, in particular in their treatment of the following knowledge issue: Should we pursue knowledge if it will be discredited and/or altered in the future? Religion is a knowledge system where the discarding of fundamental doctrine is absolutely forbidden, and natural science is a knowledge system where the discarding of doctrine is necessary for the advancement of knowledge. Hence, these systems with nearly antipodal values of challenging previous knowledge can provide insight into the way we perceive the universe. The discarding of knowledge creates several knowledge issues, and these knowledge issues are explored.
	To begin, natural science, such as all areas of knowledge, has several axiomatic truths and methods which define it. In particular, the purposes of science are centered around understanding the universe through ways of knowing including induction, sense perception, language, and imagination. The fundamental axioms that defines our understanding of modern science are naturalism, the belief that only natural forces and laws operate in the universe, and the idea that what knowledge we acquire through sense perception is truth in its representation of universal laws (Papineau). These axioms bring natural scientists to the following conclusion: there is a given set of universal laws that we are trying to understand, and any inconsistencies between our predictions and observations is a fault of our understanding of the universe, rather than a fault in the mechanisms of the laws of the universe. As such, our knowledge in natural science is constantly being replaced by new knowledge from inconsistencies between our existing theories and our observations.
	Religion as an area of knowledge, in comparison, also creates an understanding of the universe. However, there are numerous key differences between religion and natural science, particularly in their respective ways of knowing. First, note that although I am talking about traditional views on the changeability of religion, modern religion has been shifting to a stance much less based on dogmatic principles. Religion, unlike natural science, places a much greater emphasis on faith and authority in the attempt to explain the universe. Although most modern focus on religion is given to Judeochristian mythology, which has a greater basis in answering non-scientific questions addressing questions such as the afterlife, older religious knowledge systems even before Greek and Egyptian mythology were borne out of inability to explain natural phenomena using induction and deduction as reasoning systems (Livingston). However, all religious knowledge systems utilize axioms structurally similar to naturalism. Modern theology namely differentiates two types of major mythological creatures: gods and demons. These gods and demons exist, quite similar to naturalism’s universal laws, and have a measurable effect on the universe. However, unlike in natural science, these gods and demons may be influenced by human activity, such as prayer, sacrifice, and fast. The explanations of the universe given by religious knowledge systems are given in doctrine and are not susceptible to change or for the results to be tested. Unlike in natural science, which is a system based on disproving existing knowledge, religious knowledge can never come into question and can never be replaced. However, it must be said that religious knowledge systems and natural science are not incompletely incompatible in their treatment of understanding and explaining the universe. Although these knowledge systems differ greatly in their treatment of replacing knowledge, they both encounter similar knowledge issues. 
	If the knowledge gained today could eventually be replaced, in reference to our current knowledge, how can we categorize knowledge as reliable? Is it even possible for knowledge to be completely reliable? The perceived reliability of knowledge is often influenced largely by authority, although authority is typically not thought of as a typical way of knowing in natural science as much as in religion. In particular, I can speak from personal experience in the impact of authority on the reliability of knowledge. Last year, I began attending a research internship. I became very close with the professor there, and developed immense respect for him. This respect led me to sometimes actively censor myself whenever I had an observation that was new to me, because I operated by the assumption that what was new to me was old to the professor. However, some of these observations were crucial to the research and after I revealed them to him a week later, it galvanized the progression of the research. However, even after this incident, I still consider his observations and inferences to be much more reliable than my own. Although ideally the reliability of knowledge should be free from influence by authority, often this is not the case. Reliability of knowledge, ideally, should be derived from the consistency between the method used to create knowledge and the axiomatic systems of deriving new knowledge. In natural science, this follows naturalism. In religious knowledge systems, this follows the agreement with dogma fundamental to the mythology. Hence, the reliability of knowledge can be assessed from its consistency with axiomatic knowledge creation methods, but can be affected by beliefs from authority.
	To illustrate this point, consider the Miller-Urey experiment of 1953 (Gishlick). In this famous experiment, the two scientists chemically simulated the conditions of early Earth with similar inorganic chemical compounds and even artificial lightning. In this experiment, the scientists proved that organic compounds could be synthesized from inorganic compounds, which proved to be extremely controversial to those who place great value on religious knowledge systems. Even though the Miller-Urey experiment was completely consistent with naturalism and the scientific method, and hence is believed by the knower community of scientists as reliable, it still is not globally accepted today as proof of the origins of organic compounds on Earth because of disagreement with the knower community of religious authorities. There are countless other examples where religion has obstructed the perceived reliability of knowledge - in Darwin’s publication of On the Origin of Species, in Copernicus’ heliocentric model of the solar system, and more (Dewberry). However, as our tools for developing scientific understanding are improving, we are able to explain countless more questions that were previously unexplainable, and the influence of religious authority on the reliability of knowledge created by natural science is gradually weakening and weakening.
	Authority can take many forms. Nearly all IB students have conducted an internal assessment in their two years in the Diploma Programme. Often, these experiments are meant for students to investigate a known law or relation. When IB students conduct data collection and find data points that disagree with a known trend, the outlier is much more frequently attributed to systematic or random error than to a newly observed trend in the universe. It is possible that the data point could lead to a novel discovery (and in my case with research, it actually has). However, obedience to authority can obstruct the perceived reliability of the novel knowledge created.
	The question of discarding knowledge brings about another knowledge issue: is some knowledge more valuable than other knowledge? When one considers the value of knowledge, they must analyze the extent to which the knowledge furthered understanding within the knowledge system within a given time frame. In pre-historic and paleolithic religious knowledge systems, knowledge created was extremely valuable, because it advanced the understanding of the universe greatly within a small time period, providing explanations for climate, weather, and other natural events. Due to the dogmatic basis of religious knowledge systems, the advancement of knowledge is typically slow. Natural science, in contrast, provided comparatively little value to the human race in the pre-historic and paleolithic eras. However, in modern history, science has made great advancements which allowed for the development of the knowledge systems in a comparatively shorter timescale. While modern religion also does have its merits in building upon dogma, natural science has been given increasing attention in recent years. What accounts for this? The final factor at play in determining the value of knowledge is the ability to make predictions. Humanity can then utilize these predictions to make useful work. In mythological knowledge, religious acts - prayers, sacrifice, fast - could produce some effect to aid the religious knower community. These perceived effects are influenced by confirmation bias, in that the human brain innately attempts to find patterns where none may sometimes exist. Natural science, on the other hand, has gained recent attention for its ability to make useful predictions, and it differs from religion in its treatment of these inconsistencies. While religious knowledge systems can explain these inconsistencies as “God’s will” or as “The Way”, natural science embraces these inconsistencies to make better theories.
	In conclusion, much about knowledge can be discovered from the treatment of new knowledge in natural science and religion. In particular, knowledge is valuable and reliable so long as it can make useful predictions, fits within axiomatic knowledge discovery methods, and by how much it influenced the development of the area of knowledge within a given time period.
The Great Chinese Famine of 1959-1961, also known as the Three-Year Famine, was the largest famine in human history. This famine claimed millions of lives; historians estimate that the famine caused approximately 30 million deaths. Despite its inordinate significance in Chinese history, the topic has remained relatively taboo and as such little academic study has been conducted to determine the basis of the famine, which would be necessary for prevention of a similar situation in the future.
	This investigation seeks to analyze the many sources of the famine to determine the principal cause. A wide variety of factors are considered, which are divided into four categories: natural causes, political conflicts, economic failures, and psychosocial influences. Political and social events are taken from a diverse range of sources, which range from testimonials of those who have suffered in the famine to the opinions of experienced historians who have devoted their careers to studying Maoism or the Great Leap Forward. In any case, multiple sources, both primary and secondary, are chosen so that they present a wide variety of views and opinions of the outcome and the causes of the Great Chinese Famine of 1959-1961. Only those events between the declaration of the People's Republic of China (October 1, 1949) and the end of the Great Chinese Famine (1961) will be considered in this investigation. This study does not concern itself with investigating the factors affecting the length of the famine, which would be out of scope of the investigation.
	This investigation concludes that, although there were many contributory factors at play, the Great Chinese Famine was principally caused by the social environment brought about by Mao's policies and activities. Events such as the Hundred Flowers Campaign and the Anti-Rightist Campaign created a social environment which disallowed for critical thought and dialectic. In addition, this environment made reporting problems impossible, so Mao could not address these problems which would lead to a disastrous famine. By not being able to address these fundamental problems, Mao's regime created a famine the world would never be able to forget.



















Introduction
	The People's Republic of China (PRC) was declared on October 1, 1949 by the Communist Party of China (CPC), under the direction of Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung). It was established to supplant the existing nationalist Kuomintang (KMT) government under the direction of Chiang Kai-shek. The CPC succeeded because it proposed an egalitarian society, which gave basic freedoms the KMT did not offer, such as freedom of thought, speech, publication, and assembly, among others. As the rise of the CPC coincided with the fall of the Soviet Union under Josef Stalin, Mao believed that he could build a society that avoided the mistakes of the Soviet Union and could more effectively achieve its goals of industrial and agricultural growth. Moreover, Mao believed that, with his form of socialism, China could "overtake England [in agricultural and industrial output] and catch up with America" in a very short time period (Zheng family, quoted in China - A Century of Revolution 40:11).
	To achieve these impressive goals, Mao began a gradual transformation of China in agricultural and industrial production. Namely, Mao commenced the Great Leap Forward (GLF) during the years of 1958-1961. With the GLF, the CPC achieved a rapid transformation of China by first pooling property into so-called "cooperatives", where multiple families managed the same plot of land, and ultimately into "communes", where private property was outlawed and where multiple towns shared the same land (Spence 579). The most disastrous facet of the GLF, however, came out of the desire for heightened industrial output. China was to implement "backyard furnaces" in its various communes, to produce a greater level of steel for its industrial development. Although the raw production (in tons) did increase, it was at the expense of the quality and it was in no way sustainable. Entire forests were destroyed to provide fuel for the furnaces, and anything made from iron or steel was burned, ranging from pots and bed frames to tools (China - A Century of Revolution 40:25). When it became apparent that the industrial output was unsustainable, Mao saw the limiting factor of the productivity to be a limited workforce. In consequence, he ordered that thousands of agricultural workers move to industry. Shortly after the commencement of the GLF, the largest famine in human history ensued, taking an estimated 30 million lives. Conditions were horrendous; Peng Dehuai, the Chinese Minister of Defense during the GLF, wrote "Grain scattered across the ground, potato leaves withered, strong young people have gone to make steel, only children and old women reap the crops. How will they eat next year? Please, think of the people" (China - A Century of Revolution 56:07). Peng's words only begin to describe the horrors seen during the Great Chinese Famine of 1959-1961.
	Although the Chinese government officially blamed the famine on the droughts and floods that were seen during 1959-61, it is clear that there are many political and social factors at play. This investigation seeks to analyze the causes of the Great Chinese Famine to determine the source principally responsible. This topic is worthy of study because it has impacted so many lives and changed the course of Chinese history forever. Even with its extraordinary significance, it is still a taboo topic in China even today. However, the fact that it is not a well-studied topic underscores the necessity of investigation, so as to prevent a similar situation from happening in the future. Personally, this investigation is significant to me because I have many friends from China whose families have been permanently affected by this tragedy, and also because, in my travels, I have experienced the poverty of the Chinese countryside which still exists from the remnants of these events. This investigation is separated into two sections, one for analysis of the causes of the famine, and one for comparing and contrasting historical schools of thought. The former section is subdivided into four main topics: investigating the social, political, economic, and environmental factors which contributed to the famine. Throughout the paper, two major historiographical schools of thought are considered: the orthodoxy, which argues that Mao's actions directly caused the famine, or the revisionist school of thought, which argues that the political and economic situation in China would have brought about the famine, regardless of Mao's actions. This investigation proposes that the principal cause of the Great Chinese Famine is not inherent in the goals of the GLF or in the direct actions of Mao, but rather the complex social atmosphere created in the PRC which disallowed for critical thought and dialectic, one which did not value intelligence, but rather, submission to Maoist dogma.
















Body - Analysis of the Causes of the Great Chinese Famine
Section A. Environmental Problems
	To begin, the years of 1959 to 1961 did see particularly bad flooding and drought, that gave the CCP some scapegoat for the horrendous famine that would occur in these years; thus, the Chinese government officially blamed the environmental conditions of China for the famine (China - A Century of Revolution 57:53). Indeed, the famine was originally referred to as the "Three Year Natural Disaster" (China - A Century of Revolution 53:23). Several factors contributed to these poor environmental conditions. First, an estimated 60 percent of agricultural land received no rain at all in 1960 (Liu 1). Undoubtedly, this significantly reduced the possible production of crops in that year, which was exacerbated by the flooding of the Yellow River in July 1959; this flooding, however, is estimated to have only taken two million lives, but it is likely that there were other adverse agricultural effects.
	Another factor to consider is the climate changes brought about by the deforestation during the Great Leap Forward. Many of China's forests "were cut down to provide fuel for the backyard furnaces" in the thousands of communes (Mimmack 171). In consequence, many of the natural resources provided by these forests were not available, harming Chinese agriculture and possibly affecting the climate during the years of 1959-1961. However, the extent of the deforestation on the climate change is not clear.
	These conditions did exacerbate existing conditions, but the floods and draught were not the primary contributors to the famine. Famines and draughts were a major part of China's historical experience in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries; the shifting course of the Yellow river often claimed millions of lives (Pong 14). However, even in the worst conditions, these disasters could never approach the magnitude of lives taken in the Great Chinese Famine. With these factors in mind, it is clear that there are more significant contributory factors to the destructive power of the famine.
Section B. Political Problems
Subsection B1. China before the Great Leap Forward
	Understanding the context of the design of the Great Leap Forward is necessary to properly analyze its relation to the famine. After the proclamation of the CCP on October 1, 1949, and before the Great Leap Forward occurred, Mao implemented the First Five Year Plan. In this plan, Mao was to slowly assimilate the Chinese society to a socialist structure. Some scholars posit that, while the Soviet style of agriculture was "immensely destructive" in its rash actions, the economic policy of the CCP was shrewd; the CCP "…had from early on been a rural organization, and it knew how to take gradual steps toward its eventual goal" (Fairbank 282). 
Despite this, some contend that the First Five Year Plan reflected Mao's vision for an overly industrial economy, with "…58.2 percent of government investment [going] to industrial development, but only 7.6 percent [going] to agriculture" (Mimmack 163). Agriculture seems to have been tossed aside, undoubtedly leading to serious problems even before the Great Leap Forward was conceived.
	Famine was already present in China in the early- to mid-1950s, and some argue that the failure of Mao to recognize this warning sign majorly contributed to the famine (Dikötter 67). Many were dying of hunger even before the communes were introduced. Dikötter reports that Mao had received "numerous reports about hunger, disease and abuse from every corner of the country", in the form of "personal letters mailed by courageous individuals, unsolicited complaints from local cadres or investigations undertaken on his behalf by security personnel or private secretaries" (Dikötter 69). Hence, there is no doubt that Mao was adequately informed on the topic, but he, like many, were energized by the apparent successes of the plan (China - A Century of Revolution 49:16).
	Despite the apparent failure of the First Five Year Plan to diminish famine, Mao's leadership had some apparent successes. First, Mao's rapid reorganization of rural China into cooperative farms had been successful; by the end of 1957, "700,000 cooperative farms had been created, each of which contained up to 300 families" (Hsu, quoted in Spence 579). Agricultural figures for 1957, however were disappointing: "grain production increased only 1 percent over the year, in the face of 2 percent population rise" (Spence 574). What can account for this discrepancy? Although some argue that Mao's leadership skills were at fault of the failures of his Plans (including the famine), constituting the orthodoxy, the revisionist school of thought argues that Mao's political Plans were intrinsically flawed and would fail under any leader. This orthodox-revisionist debate is central to understanding the Great Chinese Famine.
Subsection B2. Sino-Soviet Relations
	One major tenet of the orthodox argument centers around Sino-Soviet relations. Mao launched the Great Leap Forward (GLF) to fulfill his "utopian vision of catching up to Great Britain and advanced industrialized countries in a few years" (Pong 18). The orthodoxy argues that Mao had several other motives which distracted him from facing the real problems his plans were facing. Primarily, these historians argue that Mao was involved in a "rivalry with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev for the leadership of the International Communist Movement" (Jisheng 89). Mao's greatest wish was indeed "to overtake the Soviet Union", in order for Mao "to take over actual leadership" (Jisheng 90). Evidence also suggests that Mao looked down on Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, supporting Mao's feelings of political superiority that, some argue, led to the ignorance of problems that led to the famine (Jisheng 90).
	Despite his rivalry with Soviet leadership, Mao paradoxically took great measures to build relations with the Soviet Union. First, he deliberately modeled the Great Leap Forward to resemble Stalin's Five Year Plans (Fairbank 299). In particular, Mao similarly divided the society into the "rulers and the ruled", and the CCP had "set up a Stalinist command economy they could really order the peasantry around" (Fairbank 297). However, many of those who subscribe to the revisionist school of thought argue that the Stalinist model would never work for China because the "Chinese population in 1950 was four times as big and their standard of living only half as high as that of the Russian population in the 1920s" (Fairbank 299). Hence, the reasoning for Mao's choice in designing the Great Leap Forward is unclear. Some argue that Mao was attempting to emphasize the non-Western nature of China in order to "overtake England and catch up with America", when his true competition was the Soviet Union (China - A Century of Revolution 40:11). Others argue that Mao was attempting to show that the failures of the Soviet Union under Stalin were not problems of the Five Year Plans, but problems of the leadership, attempting to showcase the successes of communism (Jisheng 89). In any case, revisionist argue that Mao's choice to emulate Soviet agriculture did play a major role in the famine.
	In addition, Mao strengthened China's relation with the Soviet Union and North Korea by sending the nations any excess grain produced in the GLF (Mimmack 172). The orthodox school of thought argues that Mao's decisions to do so were foolish and did not contribute to Mao's goals for the development of China, thus contributing majorly to the famine (Dikötter 67). These scholars point out that Mao had knowledge of the problems of hunger that China was facing, which he utterly ignored when he made the decision to export the grain, comprising a major economic failure (Dikötter 67). Although revisionists argued that Mao had limited knowledge of the extent of the famine, thus putting Mao to less blame, studies of official documents and interviews are finding that Mao indeed had much knowledge on the possible consequences of the export (Dikötter 69). In any case, his actions exacerbated the Great Chinese Famine.
Section C. Economic Problems
Subsection C1. Structural Problems in the Design of the Great Leap Forward
	Similar to the First Five Year Plan, the Great Leap Forward was primarily centered around increasing industrial output, rather than agricultural output (Mimmack 163). At first, the production level seemed to be increasing (largely out of competition for higher and higher reported statistics), so many enthusiastically continued their hard labor. However, the sheer amount of resources was decreasing. The effects of this discrepancy proved to be immensely destructive. Anything made of iron and steel was put into the furnaces: even "pots, bedframes, and tools" were used (China - A Century of Revolution 40:25). According to Mao's physician Li Zhisui, "every piece of iron and steel was taken from every family and made useless" (China - A Century of Revolution 42:22). The extent to which this contributed to the famine is not directly clear. Some point to the fact that many forests were cut down to provide fuel for the furnaces, and made some farming areas unusable (Mimmack 171). 
	Besides causing the destruction of many resources and tools, the heavy focus on industrial production had another disastrous effect. Although the agricultural and industrial figures for 1956 were positive, the figures for 1957 "were disappointing" (Spence 579). Mao sincerely believed  that the dip in production was caused by not enough manpower, so in response "many people [were] taken away from their fields to work in the communes or in factories, with terrible consequences for agriculture" (Mimmack 171). The massive exodus from the countryside caused problems for the cities, "which could not provide living for so major an influx of the rural population" (Dernberger 369). Hence, the orthodoxy finds that many of the hunger and population problems in China were intensified as a result of Mao's actions.
	In addition to the problems in steel production, Mao proposed unfeasible goals for the limited amount of workers available. The orthodoxy points out that Mao relied too strongly on the strength of the human will as a tool for productivity. It is true that Mao utilized mass mobilization of the Chinese people, and he did so through various techniques. In the transition of old peasant agriculture to the communes, Mao used proportional "semi-capitalist" returns which "kept the rich peasant community from fighting back," while keeping the motivation of self-interest as a driving force of productivity (Fairbank 282). He also created an environment of motivation in the communes, where the people believed that success is purely correlated to hard work. Wang Ruoshui, a CPC member, states, "we worked all day long… we were so enthusiastic" (China - A Century of Revolution 38:34). He goes on to quote the slogan, "catch the stars and moon", which reflects the "situations of mass hysteria" that Mao created. Both orthodox and revisionist scholars agree that people "worked around the clock and abandoned established ways, almost like anarchists seeking freedom from all constraints" (Fairbank 298). However, the efficacy of this aspect of Maoism is heatedly debated. It supports the revisionist argument, in that the direct problem causing the famine was not external factors such as the willingness of the people to contribute.
Subsection C2. Mass Decentralization
	The push for higher and higher agricultural yields necessitated the use of efficient production techniques. In particular, many were drawn to the idea of building "super-crops", based on the claims of Soviet scientist Trofim Lysenko (Mimmack 172). This school of thought, known as "Lysenkoism", is a major part of the revisionist argument and is relatively controversial. It involved the use of several methods, including "deep-plowing" and "close-planting". Deep-plowing "was a technique whereby a field is plowed into deep triangular trenches with the aim of creating more grain per square meter", and close-planting involved placing the plants in a closer proximity to each other to obtain a higher yield per unit area (Mimmack 172). According to Mao's physician Li Zhisui, though, "it was all just a show for Mao" (China - A Century of Revolution 1:51:36). In fact, these techniques often "exhausted the soil and produced lower crop yields" (Mimmack 172). 
	In addition, the organization of rural society into the communes brought communal dining halls. These halls were intended to be a more efficient way to allocate time and resources in the traditional task of preparing meals (Pong 18). Although it is debated, the revisionist consensus is that the communal dining halls played a major role in the famine, driving rural families to destitution (Jisheng 21). In addition to an "eat as much as you can" policy, there was "pilferage and leakage of supplies" (Pong 18). Revisionists argue that the mass decentralization of the Chinese economy led to a weakened control over the society, which, in combination with inexperienced local management, led to agricultural problems (Fairbank 300).
Section D. Psychosocial Factors and Intimidation Techniques
	Mao believed the success of China to be intrinsically connected to the unity of the people, rather than having limited resources or other factors. This led him to create a society based around fear of becoming a public enemy. This mood of fearfulness is hypothesized to be the primary cause of the Great Chinese Famine.
	Aside from the popular view of Mao being an "ideal, hard-working, incorruptible Asian",  his persona was surrounded by intimidation; the CCP conducted several campaigns that led to an environment where intellectuals were targeted and critical thought was discouraged (Feigon 5). The first of these events was the Hundred Flowers Campaign, enacted in 1956. During this period, the CCP openly encouraged its citizens to share their opinions of the government. Very soon after, "thousands of articles appeared criticizing all manner of CCP actions" (Mimmack 169). Rather than using the advice as constructive criticism, Mao took it as a personal, political attack. Shortly after, the Anti-Rightist campaign was launched, in which "hundreds of intellectuals were identified as 'rightists', who would go on to "[commit] suicide or [be] executed, and millions of people were sent into the countryside to 'learn' from the peasants or were sent to labor camps" (Mimmack 169). Thus, Mao showed that the opinion of intellectuals was not to be considered or even accepted in the society, creating a situation of mass hysteria and fear of political opposition (Chang, quoted in Mimmack 173). This fear of political opposition was a major factor in the famine because it prevented change in Mao's policies, where it could have prevented major aspects of the famine.
	Mao's views on intellectual opposition and political dialectic were made even more clear at the Lushan conference in 1958. Marshal Peng Dehuai, one of Mao's longest-standing supporters, spoke out about his policy on "rash advancement", trying to convince Mao to reverse his policy (Shelton 172). Mao interpreted his argument as "political treachery" and Peng was later later denounced and purged (China - A Century of Revolution 50:46). Mao made Peng into an example to showcase to the world that he would not take any political criticism.
	The orthodox school of thought argues that Mao was overly paranoid, and his paranoid nature made an enemy out of those who offered criticism to his actions. This in turn created a society where intellect was not valued and to speak out was a mistake. In consequence, the intellectuals were silenced, and the rest of the populace had essentially blind faith in Mao's decisions. The orthodoxy points out that Mao relied too strongly on the strength of the human will as a tool for productivity, by viewing anyone who opposed his rash advances as a "committee for hindering progress (Jisheng 93). Many local cadres were "under intense political pressure to fulfill an exceed production targets", often "reporting inflated harvest figures" (Pong 18). Zhang Langlang reports, "if one commune said they could turn out 150 tons an acre, another one would say their target is 180 tons. Each commune or school would promise a higher amount until the last school gave their highest figure" (China - A Century of Revolution 43:55). To make matters worse, the discrepancy between actual and reported figures was blamed on peasants, who were accused of "concealing or stealing food" and who were often eventually "tortured or killed" (Shelton 172). Hence, there was a great deal of corruption in the local authority which led to a silenced society. Attention to the problems in China, and also to the warning signs mentioned by Dikötter, was prevented by this social atmosphere constructed by Mao. While the revisionist argument does explain contributory factors toward the Great Chinese Famine, the famine itself could have been completely avoided if early action was taken to prevent exacerbation of the warning signs seen in the mid-1950s.
	Given all these factors, whether they be problems in the economic design, execution, or administration of the Great Leap Forward, the orthodox and revisionist schools of thought have great deals of evidence to back their claims. While it is true that the Great Leap Forward was an intrinsically flawed system, and may have not been appropriate for China at that time, there is no doubt that it was the social atmosphere created by Mao's actions that silenced intellectuals and essentially all critical thought that could have led to the prevention of the problems in the Great Leap Forward long before the famine occurred.


Conclusion
	To conclude, there is a wide body of evidence that has been presented in this investigation. The evidence is roughly divided into two categories: the revisionist school of thought which argues that the Great Leap Forward was intrinsically flawed as a system and thus created the problems that would lead to the famine, and the orthodox school of thought, which argues that Mao's actions were the primary cause of the failure of the Great Leap Forward and the principal cause of the Great Chinese Famine. Although there is a substantial wealth of evidence for both schools of thought, the primary contributing factor toward the Great Chinese Famine of 1959-61 was truly the social atmosphere of paranoia and Mao's political ignorance of the warning signs presented before and during the Great Leap Forward. Thus, this investigation finds the cause of the famine to be a synthesis of the orthodox and revisionist points of view; a post-revisionist viewpoint is adopted, with emphasis on the orthodox viewpoint. Although there are many factors which contributed to the famine, including Lysenkoism and natural causes, they were all able to be prevented with the proper attention. Mao's role within the Great Chinese Famine provides useful insight into the dangers of censorship and having leaders with boundless amounts of power.

I have decided to focus this mathematical exploration around bioptic vision. The body's ability to gather, analyze, and store visual stimuli from a wide range of sources fascinates me. Before, I believed that the function of depth perception was something the brain just "figured out" based on the angles of the eyes, and it never occurred to me that our body may perform specific calculations. However, as we learned about the rules of trigonometry, it became apparent to me that this was possible to model with mathematics. From the knowledge of the angles of our eyes and the distance between them, we can calculate the position and even the movement of an object relative to our body. This has many implications in fields within biology, as most mammals require depth perception to survive. Also, this model would explain why people who lose vision in one eye cannot perceive the distance of an object to an object. Perhaps this could also explain the mechanism of other everyday optical devices, such as 3D glasses or eyeglasses, allowing for the addition of a physics perspective into this biology and mathematics exploration.
	First, I decided to investigate the a simple scenario of calculating the distance from the center of two receptors to an object, given that the two angle measures of the eyes is the same. I then decided to extend the model to scenarios where the angle measures were different, which represents nearly all of the two-dimensional vision calculations seen in daily life. After, I sought to extend the model to three dimensions by using angles of inclination or depression. These must be accounted for when creating a three-dimensional bioptic model for vision.
Introduction
	Vision is a fundamental part of life. Nearly all organisms that we encounter on a regular basis, ranging from humans to dogs to birds to arthropods - utilize some form of visual sensing. Although the number of eyes in an organism can vary widely, particularly in arthropods, mammalian vision is largely bioptic, and many mammals (including humans) have the ability to perceive the depth of an object (also called stereopsis) (Calvert). The fact that depth perception is seen across a wide range of mammalian and non-mammalian organisms suggests that it conveys a significant evolutionary advantage. As such, it is necessary that we understand the mathematical method of the biological function of depth perception, in order to understand the process of vision, to treat vision disorders, and to apply the knowledge of depth perception to create better vision technology.
	To begin, this investigation seeks to determine a mathematical model to understand the mechanism of human stereopsis. There are a few factors that will not be considered in this investigation for its lack of relevance to human depth perception, such as a greater number of eyes than two and such as the mechanism of color vision within each eye. Human vision consists of two visual images produced by each eye, which are then consolidated into a single image with knowledge of 3D position of each object (see Figure 1). As a demonstration, in this image, if one crosses their eyes or relaxes the vision until the two pictures combine to one, the brain can calculate the relative position of the three pins.
	Figure 1. Simple stereoptic vision in humans (Source: Cooper).

	Vision is extremely important for proper function in our society where visual information is becoming increasingly represented. Every day, our brain is overflowing with visual stimuli, which can be as simple as looking at a cloud to something as complex as reading a book or avoiding an accident while driving. It is clear that the brain has efficient systems to gather and process visual information, and depth perception is necessary for many of these activities. Depth perception disorders, such as amblyopia and strabismus, cause an individual to be unable to find difficulty in functioning within society (Johns Hopkins). Activities such as sports and driving require depth perception. Further, manipulating visual data using stereopsis can be useful for the development of vision systems in robotics. Current visualization technology uses either radar or sonar, but these systems may not be as precise as a bioptic system of depth perception. A robotic model of human vision could create a new paradigm for producing self-driving cars, other automated navigation systems, and mapping technology, which would improve safety of vehicles and potentially save many lives. As such, it is necessary that we have a working mathematical understanding of stereopsis so we can develop technologies for individuals that need compensation for stereopsis.
Section 1. Structure of Investigation
This investigation is partitioned into four main sections. First, a simple two-dimensional case is examined, where the object is directly in the middle of the eyes and the angle between each of the eyes and the face is the same. Then, the second section concerns itself with finding a general formula for finding the position of an object given that the two angle measures may be different. The third section attempts to extrapolate the vision model to three dimensions, which would be more realistic of human vision. Finally, the results section intends to investigate the validity of the model, to account for any potential weaknesses or strengths it may have, and to investigate further implications.
Section 2. Finding a Simple Two-Dimensional Model for Stereopsis
This section attempts to find the coordinates of an object k through two pieces of input information: the angle of the eyes (which is equal), and the distance between them (∂). Thus, the situation can be modeled as follows (where the middle of the eyes is the origin):






Figure 2-1. Simple Two-Dimensional Model

This model is convenient because the ∆x line is a perpendicular bisector to the ∂ line, allowing for the separation of the triangle into two congruent right triangles.






	
Figure 2-2. Simplified Two-Dimensional Right Triangle
As the tangent function is defined to be:


As θ and ∂ are known, but ∆x is not known, the value of ∆x can be calculated as follows.


In addition, since the x-coordinate of k is always equal to 0 and y = ∆x, we can say that:


Thus, we come to the final function for the coordinates as a function of ∂ and θ.


Although this function is accurate for this example, there are some limitations that need to be considered. This function only works for values of θ that are between 0 and π/2, which is the typical range of vision where stereopsis is functional (instead of making the eyes converge, this makes them diverge, which does not allow for depth perception). In addition, this is not a realistic model, because we are never looking exactly directly ahead of us.
Section 3. Finding a General Two-Dimensional Model for Stereopsis
To create a more accurate model that addresses these problems, the diagram must be slightly altered.





Figure 3-1. General Two-Dimensional Model
There are some key changes from the previous model. First, the θ values are not equal. In addition, both sides (other than ∂) are not equal, so they must be referred to by two variables a and b. Finally, the x-coordinate of k is not 0 and the y-value is not equal to ∆x, necessitating the introduction of vectors into the problem.
To begin finding the k coordinates, ∆x and its angle to ∂ must be found. It follows that:

Where θ1 and θ2 are known. As such, θ3 is also now known. Since three angles and one side are known, the Law of Sines can be used to calculate the other sides. The Law of Sines states that the sin of an angle divided by the length of the leg across from the angle. Hence:


As such, the value of a is now also known. Since θ1 and the values of the two sides joining the angle (a and ∂/2) are known, the value of ∆x can be calculated through use of the Law of Cosines. The Law of Cosines is defined as:

Hence:


Now, the distance to the object from the center of the face can be known. However, the coordinates of the object can also be calculated by treating ∆x as a vector and using an angle measure. This angle measure, which will from now on be referred to as θv, is measured from the angle between the ∆x vector and the ∂ line. Since ∆x, θ1, and a are known, this can be calculated from the Law of Sines. 


Thus, the value of θv will be between 0 and π. However, since the coordinates of the origin are defined to be the middle of the two eyes, a negative angle measure would be appropriate when the object is left of the middle (when θv < π/2) and positive when the object is right of the middle (when θv > π/2). This can be accomplished quite easily by subtracting the θv expression by π/2.


Thus, both the vector ∆x and its angle θv are known, and the coordinates of k can be calculated by further simplifying the model.






Figure 3-2. Finding the coordinates of k
The coordinates of x and y can then be determined for k through the use of sin and cosine definitions. Since 


then

where


and 

Note that the csc(θ3) expression is equal to csc(π-(θ1 + θ2)). However, even this second expression can be further simplified. csc(π-(x)) = csc(x) in all cases, and this can be seen graphically. In figure 3-3, the function csc(x) is graphed, and in figure 3-4, the function csc(π-x) is graphed. They are equal, so substituting (θ1 + θ2) for x gives a function entirely in terms of only ∂, θ1, and θ2.




       Figure 3-3. A plot of csc(x).                                  Figure 3-4. A plot of csc(π-x).
Hence, the same stated above is true but with csc(θ3) substituted as csc(π-(θ1 + θ2)).
Subsection: Limitations and Domain Ranges
This model, however, is restricted by the boundaries of the trigonometric functions contained within it. There are some given constraints that restrict the model from using all data. The principal constraint is that the sum of (θ1 + θ2) must be less than π for an image to be resolved. This was the same in the simple two-dimensional case, where each of the angles could not be greater than π/2. For example, if the left eye was looking completely left to the plane of vision, the model would not work because the sum of the angles is equal to π/2. In addition, this model still does not completely represent reality because it is not in three dimensions. Can a three dimensional model be constructed?
Section 4. Finding a Three-Dimensional Model for Stereopsis
To begin, the generalized two-dimensional model can be extended to three dimensions by the use of an angle of depression or angle of elevation. This angle is necessary, because without it, we are given no information about the z-coordinate of the object. The 3D position of the object can be found by looking at each variable separately.
x-coordinate
The x-coordinate of the object is the same as it was in the two-dimensional vision model. This model can be thought of a vector on a plane that is rotating around a central axis. Since the central axis of rotation is the x-axis itself, the x-value for position cannot change.
y- and z- coordinate
Consider a situation where you look at an object one meter directly ahead of you. We would consider the y-coordinate of the object the distance to walk forward, and there would be no need to step to the side because the x-coordinate of the object directly ahead of you is equal to zero. If y is the distance you have to walk (one meter), what if the plane was rotated π/2 degrees, so the object was one meter directly beneath you? There would be no need to walk one meter forward, so we would say that y = 0, but the distance to travel in the z axis would become equal to -1. There is clearly a problem with the previous model that needs to be addressed.
The angle of depression or elevation can be defined from the following diagram:




Figure 4-1. Angle of Elevation α and coordinates of k.
This represents a similar problem to finding the general two-dimensional coordinates of k. Since the angle α and the length of the hypotenuse ∆x is known, the values of y and z can be calculated using the cosine and sine formulae.


Hence, we have the following final formula for the position of an object in three dimensions from the angles of the eyes (θ1, θ2, α) and the position between them (∂).

where



Test Example
When looking at an object ahead of you, to the right, and above the horizon, one would expect θ1 < θ2 and for α to be positive. With these numbers, we would expect the object to have a positive x-value, y-value, and z-value. Arbitrarily choosing 1.0 as θ1, 2.0 as θ2, and 1.0 as α (all in radians), we can substitute these in to find the position. However, we also need the ∂ value, which is found from the distance between the eyes. I measured my own to be 0.055 meters. Substituting these values in, we get a ∆x value of 0.34m and a θv value of 1.07 radians. Hence:


Thus, the result was consistent with the hypothesis and the results support the success of the model.
Implications and Discussion
To conclude, this model can calculate the position of the object in three dimensional space given four parameters: the two angles between the eyes, the angle of elevation, and the distance between the eyes. It must first be noted that this may not be completely representative of the method of biological function of stereopsis. It is very unlikely that the brain calculates in base 10, such as was done in this entire investigation. In addition, the part of the brain that perceives depth likely does not have access to trigonometric data, but rather likely uses a style of repetitive learning similar to machine learning in computer science. However, the results do indicate some remarkable qualities of the brain. First, the brain is able to somehow measure the distance between the eyes, which can change drastically with an individual's growth. If this were not possible, we would always sense that objects are much closer to us than they actually are by a factor of the ratio between the distance of our eyes as a baby and the distance of our eyes now. In addition, this investigation underscores the immense power of the brain to make mathematical calculations quickly and accurately. Even if the brain does not use trigonometric functions in stereopsis, which seems fundamental to calculating depth, the fact that it has another method of finding the distance to an object is astounding. I plan on using this formula to create a basic machine capable of launching a ball at a point with the exact speed and angle to hit a target, and I see potential applications of this in other areas of technology. Moreover, I plan on relating this model to other areas of my life, such as 3D glasses and eyewear.
Further research
Future investigations can concern themselves mainly with finding the higher derivatives of position and how the brain can model them. Does the brain use the change of position over a given time interval to calculate the velocity? What is the time interval used? Does the brain predict the limit of the average velocity as the time interval approaches zero? All of these questions are fascinating and could serve as useful extensions to this model of depth perception.
Intrinsic Protein Disorder in the Mechanisms ofBacterial and Viral Drug ResistanceSteven Schmatzunder the direction ofProf. Gil AlterovitzHarvard Medical SchoolResearch Science InstituteJuly 30, 2013AbstractIntrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) have received increasing attention in recent years asa result of their various roles in molecular biology. This project attempts to analyze the roleof IDPs in bacterial and viral drug resistance-related proteins. DisEMBL, a neural-networkbased predictor, is used to compare the number of IDPs in resistance-associated protein setswith those IDPs in several bacterial and viral proteomes. This investigation concludes thatbacterial drug-resistance is negatively correlated with protein disorder (p < 0.0001), whileviral drug-resistance is positively correlated with protein disorder (p < 0.0001). These resultsreect the dierences in the nature of drug resistance mechanisms in the two pathogen types,suggesting possible avenues for future drug research.SummaryTraditionally, all proteins were thought to have a well-dened three-dimensional struc-ture that dened their functional properties. In recent years, however, a new class of proteinswithout this well-dened structure has been discovered, known as intrinsically disorderedproteins. These proteins are seen widespread throughout nature, having signicance in sig-naling pathways and in disease, but they have not yet been associated with drug resistance.This investigation concludes that in bacteria, drug resistance-associated proteins contain lessdisorder than the rest of the bacterial proteins, and in viruses, resistance-related proteinscontain higher disorder percentages. These ndings reect dierent molecular mechanismsof resistance, providing insight to better drug design based on pathogen type.1 Introduction1.1 Drug ResistanceThe introduction of antibiotics has been of extraordinary signicance to society in the 21stcentury, drastically reducing morbidity and mortality of a wide range of diseases [1]. Theseantibiotics have been in large-scale production since the 1940s, estimated in 2002 to be100,000 to 200,000 tonnes per year worldwide [2]. However, the introduction of any potenttherapeutic agent can be quickly compromised by the potential development of resistance,which can render a drug useless and can cause serious problems for the medical community[3]. This resistance can be seen across multiple domains of life, primarily in bacteria andviruses [4].A rapidly increasing number of organisms have antimicrobial properties [1]. Combinedwith the high mortality and morbidity of diseases caused by these organisms, resistance con-tributes to the increasing numbers of deaths from drug-resistant organisms. One of the moreprevalent drug-resistant bacteria is multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MDR-TB). This bacterium is becoming increasingly prevalent and can have a mortality rate of72% to 89% [5]. Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis alone caused 310,000 cases worldwide in2011 [6]. Many drug-resistant organisms such as MDR-TB are becoming prevalent in manymedical and residential communities.To further investigate and overcome problems caused by drug resistance, the pharmaceu-tical community must consider the molecular-level mechanisms of resistance. Bacterial andviral drug resistance operate in a variety of pathway types, all of which require wide-rangebinding ability and versatility of protein function to disable or remove potentially harmfulsubstances [7]. While viral drug resistance is focused on single-line evolution based on bene-cial mutations, bacterial drug resistance operates through several molecular pathways. Euxproteins, which evacuate potentially harmful substances from the cell, play a key role in bac-1terial drug resistance mechanisms [7]. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, for example, has clinicalresistance to a wide range of antibiotics and has a potent ability to easily acquire high-levelresistance [8]. These qualities are largely attributable to its widespread expression of drugeux systems, such as the multidrug resistant protein MexB [9]. MexB has the ability toeliminate multiple types of molecules from the cell, requiring versatility in binding and in-teraction with various intracellular chemical pathways [10]. Complex resistance mechanismssuch as those involving MexB necessitate a proper understanding of these protein-substrateinteractions for eective drug research.1.2 Intrinsically Disordered ProteinsFor years, the predominant model of protein function centered around the idea that everyprotein has a single three-dimensional structure for each unique amino acid sequence. Thisstructure, known as the protein conformation or tertiary structure, was thought to elucidatethe complex interaction of spatial and electronic factors between the protein and its part-ner [11]. This mechanism has been a classical tenet of structural biology. Later, this ideaevolved into the \induced t" model, which noted that the protein conformation changesslightly when it binds the substrate or partner protein. This model better explains enzy-matic, structural, and other functional properties of the protein, such as specicity andbinding versatility. In any case, knowledge of the three-dimensional structure of a protein isvaluable in determining its function and understanding its interactions. As such, nding thestructure of P. aeruginosa MexB would be valuable for utilizing the protein as a potentialdrug target. Protein structures are typically found via x-ray crystallography, where x-raysare diracted by a crystal containing the protein. However, nding the structure of MexBthrough this method would yield only 80 percent of the structure, with 20 percent of theresidues missing, even though the sequence is known [12]. These missing residues correlate toregions where there is no distinct three-dimensional structure and hence no clear diraction2pattern [13]. These intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) constitute parts of intrinsicallydisordered proteins (IDPs), which lack a stable tertiary structure, and rather exist in vivoas a dynamic ensemble of interconverting conformations [14]. This characteristic gives IDPsa wide range of possible functions.Figure 1: Order-order interaction (top pane), disorder-to-order transformation and disorder-order interaction (bottom pane), Courtesy of Wei-Lun HsuHence, intrinsically disordered proteins display functionally useful properties. For ex-ample, IDPs display allostery modulation, the ability to change the cooperativity (bindingability) of its partner protein while bound [15]. In addition, intrinsically disordered proteinsdisplay novel binding properties. The top pane of Figure 1 displays the typical order-orderinteraction, while the bottom pane depicts a disorder-order interaction. Here, the disorderedprotein folds into a structure induced by the ordered protein and binds at a site known asthe molecular recognition feature (MoRF) site. These MoRFs are locations on target pro-teins that induce an IDP to fold into a structured shape before binding. Dierent MoRFscan cause a disordered protein to fold in several ways, allowing for IDPs to bind to manyproteins, or to have many proteins bind to the same IDP [11]. This ability to easily bind3to many partners confers wide exibility in their function. IDPs are commonly involved ina wide range of activities, including signal transduction, transcription, translation, phos-phorylation, and disease [16]. It is hypothesized that proteins involved in drug resistance,both viral and bacterial, are largely constituted by disordered proteins. This would explainthe molecular-level mechanisms of the wide-range antibiotic resistance seen in some bacteriaand viruses. This investigation seeks to quantify the relationship between drug resistanceand protein disorder in bacterial and viral proteomes, the collection of all proteins withinindividual organisms.2 Materials and Methods2.1 Disorder Prediction and DisEMBLTo investigate the relationship between drug resistance and disorder, we must quantitativelymeasure the disorder content in an individual protein. We can use several methods to ac-complish this. First, empirical data could be employed directly. On the Protein Data Bank(PDB) curated by the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics, 3D structuresof proteins are reported from x-ray crystallography, and less commonly, nuclear magneticresonance studies [17]. By cross-referencing the missing sections of the PDB-reported struc-ture with a known amino acid sequence, a disordered region can be inferred. PDB has abuilt-in function, known as the Remark-465 annotation, which lists where there are missingcoordinates with a known sequence. This method of using empirical data, however, is notpreferable for large-scale analysis, very few disordered proteins can be gathered from thePDB. As such, using a predictor over larger data sets would be preferable.Signicant advances have been made in machine learning and articial intelligence toattempt to understand dynamical systems. In particular, there has been much focus on cre-ating multiple-layer systems that identify unknown parameters that correlate pairs of data.4Neural networks in particular have garnered large attention. These networks are systemsthat involve many processors (\neurons") running in parallel, which are given large datasetsand rules about data relationships to ultimately recognize patterns in input-output pairs,and make predictions of qualities based on similarity to given data [18].To provide a useful solution to problem of limited empirical data in disorder prediction,the European Molecular Biology Laboratory employed a neural network-based disorder pre-dictor algorithm, DisEMBL, which can infer the disorder of a residue [19]. In DisEMBL, aneural network was applied to associate the output, the areas of missing electron density (viaRemark465) with the input, their sequences. These areas of missing electron density mostoften reect protein disorder [19]. DisEMBL then assigns a probability value to each residue,solely based on the amino acid sequence and similarity to previous disordered sequences.With this algorithm, the disorder probabilities are made into a binary value through classi-cation based upon a threshold of 0.5 (if greater than this value, the residue is disordered).Using this algorithm, large datasets of proteins can be analyzed for the number of disorderedand ordered proteins.2.2 Data MiningThe National Center for Biotechnology Information: Protein database and the UniversalProtein Database database both are leading sources for gathering and reporting informationon millions of proteins, including their amino acid sequence. These databases were queried tond organisms which were annotated to have relations to pathogenicity and drug resistance.Using this method, 125,050 proteins were gathered from 14 bacteria, and 123,260 proteinswere gathered from 10 viruses. The organism strains were chosen such that the ones withthe most resistance proteins were chosen to increase the sample size.For each organism, the databases were queried for all the sequences in the proteome ofthat organism, as well as all of those proteins annotated for keywords \resistance", \drug-5resistance", \resistant", or \drug-resistant". A list of all such protein entries was mined fromeach particular query and grouped into proteome- and drug resistance-associated groups.Through this method, 2299 and 7187 resistance-related proteins were gathered for bacteriaand viruses, respectively. These were then passed into the DisEMBL algorithm to yield listsof the residues predicted to be disordered in each of the proteins.2.3 Choosing a Disorder DenitionTo investigate the percentage disorder of a protein set, the quality of disorder/order for aparticular protein must be made into a binary value, necessitating the use of a threshold.Proteins are typically classied as an IDP if their longest disordered region is greater than acertain value. Although previous studies have used several values, the length 40 denitionis a standard in the eld, largely because many proteins have disordered regions of this length[15]. As such, this denition of protein disorder was chosen for this stage of the investigation.3 Results3.1 Global StudiesFirst, global studies were performed on the data to investigate the role of protein disorderacross all pathogens within each type. This was done by nding the sum of the number ofproteins in each category. Thus, the total number of ordered and disordered proteins wasfound in the proteome and drug resistance set. The ratio of disordered proteins to the totalwithin each protein set was found, displaying a negative correlation of drug resistance to dis-order in bacteria, and a positive correlation in viruses. To analyze for statistical signicance,Pearson's 2 tests and Fisher's Exact Tests were employed to nd both the approximate andexact p-values, respectively.6Bacterial Protein Sets Total Number Number Disordered RatioBacterial Proteome 125050 2521 2.02 10􀀀2Bacterial Resistance 2299 15 6.52 10􀀀2Table 1: Total Protein Disorder Across Multiple Bacterial ProteomesViral Protein Sets Total Number Number Disordered RatioViral Proteome 123260 5802 4.71 10􀀀2Viral Resistance 7187 528 7.31 10􀀀3Table 2: Total Protein Disorder Across Multiple Viral ProteomesIt was found from these studies that there is a statistically signicant eect of proteindisorder in drug resistance sets in bacteria and viruses. Namely, in bacteria, drug resistanceappears much less in proteins associated with drug resistance when compared to respectiveproteomes (p < 0.0001 with both tests), while in viruses, disorder appears much less inproteins associated with drug resistance when compared to respective proteomes (p < 0.0001with both tests).3.2 Organism-Specic StudiesAlthough the general studies do provide useful information for bacteria and viruses, knowl-edge of the relation of resistance to disorder within each of the bacteria and the viruses isuseful to future research. Individual correlation values for the number of proteins and num-ber of disordered proteins in the proteome and resistance set were found through similarmethods to the global studies.However, the number of disordered proteins compared to the average is very low whencompared to the total number of proteins. When looking on an individual-organism basis,the number of disordered drug resistance proteins in particular quickly approaches zero,leading to a small sample size that may not represent the data accurately. To counteractthis problem, in these studies the length  10 denition is employed, rather than the length7 40 denition. This denition, although less commonly used, allows for the preservationof non-zero sample sizes that can allow for comparison of disorder percentages in proteomesand resistance-involved proteins.For each organism, Pearson's 2 tests and Fisher's Exact Tests were performed in a similarmanner to the global studies. The top six most statistically signicant bacteria and top fourmost statistically signicant viruses (those with p < 0.0001 according to both tests) are listedin Table 3 and Table 4, respectively. They are listed with their percent change coecientfound by the percent change formula applied to proteome and drug resistance disorder ratios.Comparison of the disorder ratios for bacteria and viruses are shown in Figure 2.Figure 2: Disorder to Order Ratios in Proteomes and Drug Resistance-Related Protein Setsin Bacteria (on left) and Viruses (on right). Blue regions represent proteomes and red regionsrepresent drug resistance protein sets.8Pathogen Name Total Disorder Ratio Resist Disorder Ratio % ChangeMethicillin-resistant S. aureus 252 0.232 0.197 -15.1B. pseudomallei 1710b 0.562 0.542 -3.6A. baumannii TCDC-AB0715 0.267 0.242 -9.4T. pallidum SS14 0.428 0.286 -33.2H. pylori 908 0.215 0.099 -54.0V. cholerae O395 0.288 0.251 -12.8Table 3: Disorder in Bacterial Drug Resistance Sets and ProteomesPathogen Name Total Disorder Ratio Resist Disorder Ratio % ChangeHuman herpesvirus 1 0.768 0.997 29.8H1N1 Inuenza A 0.455 0.550 20.9HIV-2 Virus 0.485 0.747 54.0Hepatitis C Virus Subtype 1a 0.283 0.628 121.9Table 4: Disorder in Viral Drug Resistance Sets and Proteomes3.3 Meta-analysisMeta-analysis concerns with contrasting and combining results from multiple studies [20].There have been various methods developed to conduct a large-scale analysis of multiplep-values to determine the signicance of a set of results. Fisher's method combines resultsfrom multiple independent tests, provided that the original null hypothesis is the same. Thesep-values are consolidated according to Equation 1, shown below.2 = 􀀀2Xki=1loge(pi) (1)In the meta-analysis of the organismic data using Fisher's method, singular p-values werefound from the set of bacterial and viral p-values found from Pearson's 2 tests and Fisher'sExact Tests. These results supported the ndings of the global studies, concluding that thereexists meta-statistical signicance in the aggregated p-values of viruses and proteins (p <0.0001).93.4 SummaryIt was found that there was a statistically signicant, positive correlation between drug resis-tance and protein disorder in bacteria, while viruses had a statistically signicant, negativecorrelation between drug resistance and protein disorder (p < 0.0001 in both cases, accordingto Fisher's exact tests and 2 tests). In addition, meta-analysis tests validated the resultsfound by the global studies (p < 0.0001 in both all viral and bacterial p-values).Although bacteria have a more positive correlation of resistance to disorder than viruses,bacteria have a lower total number of drug resistance-related proteins. With roughly thesame number of total proteins, there were 2299 resistance-related proteins in bacteria and7187 total proteins in viruses.4 DiscussionThis investigation has found that intrinsic protein disorder plays a signicant role in drugresistance in bacteria and in viruses, a nding not yet reported in the literature. There is adiering correlation between viruses and bacteria, as shown by p-values found by multiplecontingency tests, which were later analyzed through meta-analysis. These ndings suggestdierences in molecular resistance mechanisms in viruses and bacteria of those mechanismsand suggest possible routes for future drug research.4.1 Viral Drug Resistance and DisorderThese ndings also provide insight into the development of drug resistance mechanisms.Previous studies have found that, on average, viruses display a higher percentage of disorderin their proteomes than other organism types, including bacteria [21]. These studies havehypothesized that these disordered proteins provide the ability to map multiple functionsto a stretch of protein, useful for their spatially limited genomes. In addition, these studies10suggest that this intrinsic disorder would be benecial for interacting with a wide variety ofhost defense systems [21]. In the context of drug resistance, the heightened level of proteindisorder may confer a greater level of protection to antiviral drugs, because the proteinscould bind to a wider variety of possibly dangerous molecules.4.2 Bacterial Drug Resistance and DisorderIn contrast to viruses, the negative correlation of disorder to proteins involved in bacterialdrug resistance suggests a necessity for well-dened structure in drug resistance pathways.Eux proteins, such as MexB, are a large part of bacterial cellular defense mechanisms. Thesefunction of these proteins relies on the ability to have multiple conformations, to eectivelymove dangerous molecules across the cell membrane. Indeed, MexB, like many eux proteins,has a high percentage of disordered residues, which could aid the wide binding versatilityand the molecular movement of the substrate across the cell membrane [12]. In additionto eux, another mechanism of drug resistance which would suggest importance of proteindisorder is alteration in the shape of the target active site [7]. How can it be, then, thatbacteria express a lower amount of disorder in their drug resistance-related proteins thanmost others?Although eux proteins are hypothesized to be reliant on protein disorder for function,the lower disorder content in the bacterial drug resistance proteins could suggest a largerreliance on other bacterial molecular mechanisms of drug resistance than once thought.These additional enzymatic mechanisms include \bypass" pathways, where the drug reachesa protein other than the target site, and inactivation of the drug [7].Interestingly, although bacteria had a lower level of protein disorder than viruses in drugresistance protein sets, there are also numerically fewer drug resistance-associated proteinsseen in bacteria than in viruses. If more functionality and binding versatility can be mappedto disordered proteins than ordered ones, one would expect the necessity of more structured11proteins to accomplish the same task as fewer disordered proteins.We hypothesize that the drug resistance mechanism in bacteria relies on a small num-ber of multidrug-resistant disordered proteins as the primary barrier of defense to harmfulmolecules, followed by a much larger number of ordered proteins in drug inactivation andbypass pathways. These ndings suggest that the creation of antibacterial drugs to targetstructured proteins involved in drug inactivation and bypass could prove useful for ecientlycombating specic types of resistance, while targeting eux proteins as drug developmenttargets could combat multiple types of drug resistance.5 ConclusionThe work presented in this investigation describes the relationship of drug resistance toprotein disorder in bacteria and viruses. Over 120,000 protein sequences from bacteria andviruses were collected and analyzed through DisEMBL, a neural network-based predictoralgorithm of protein disorder. Through statistical and meta-statistical analyses, it was con-cluded that bacterial drug resistance has a signicant, negative correlation with disorder (p< 0.0001), while viral drug resistance has a signicant, positive correlation with disorder (p< 0.0001). This provides insight into dierences in viral and bacterial drug resistance, sug-gesting possible routes for future antibiotic and antiviral drug research. Other possible areasof research concern expanding the analysis to other types of pathogens, such as unicellulareukaryotes and cancer cells, as well as conducting molecular-level studies to investigate thepurpose of protein disorder in drug resistance pathways.126 AcknowledgmentsI would like to thank my mentor Professor Gil Alterovitz for teaching me principles ofbiomedical informatics and for overseeing the direction of my project. I would also like tothank Peijin Zhang for providing me with and teaching me how to use previous code thatproved useful to me.I thank Sam Spencer, my RSI tutor, as well as Jonah Kallenbach and Connor Duy forproviding me invaluable input on my paper and my presentation. I also thank Megan Belznerand Charlie Pasternak for teaching me how to eectively use MIT's Athena system, as wellas teaching me how to write in LATEX. I thank Dr. Andy Charman, who gave me helpfulinput on how to properly use the statistical methods used in this investigation.I would like to thank my sponsors, Dr. Anthony G. Oettinger, Harvard University; TheHonorable Thomas R. Pickering, Hills & Company; Mr. and Mrs. Joaquin I. Ballestero, Mr.and Mrs. Gary Boeka, and Dr. Robert Bosch.I would nally like to thank the Research Science Institute (RSI), sponsored by the Centerfor Excellence in Education (CEE) and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), forproviding me with such a valuable opportunity to conduct this research and for immersingme in such an intellectually stimulating community.